README.md, before:

# create-genuary

A standalone npm package that scaffolds a complete Genuary folder with all daily prompts as individual folders with starter code, ready to use!

The project uses [create-p5js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/create-p5js) under the hood to generate each daily sketch. 

Alternatively, you can provide a custom template repository to use your own starter code for each sketch.

It also generates an interactive gallery to showcase all your sketches with the corresponding prompts.

## About Genuary

Genuary is a month-long creative coding challenge that happens every January since 2021. Each day has a unique prompt to inspire generative art and creative coding experiments.

Learn more at [genuary.art](https://genuary.art)

## Quick Start

```bash
npm create genuary
```

This will create a `genuary-2025/` folder with all 31 daily p5.js sketches pre-generated based on the official Genuary prompts.


## Usage

```bash
npm create genuary [folder] [options]
```

### Examples

```bash
# Create genuary-2025/ with latest p5.js
npm create genuary

# Create my-genuary/ folder
npm create genuary my-genuary

# Create genuary-2024/ with 2024 prompts
npm create genuary -- --year 2024

# Custom name, 2024 prompts
npm create genuary my-2024 -- --year 2024

# Use specific p5.js version
npm create genuary -- --p5-version 1.11.1

# Use a custom template repository from GitHub
npm create genuary -- --git user/repository-name

# Use a custom template repository from GitLab
npm create genuary -- --git gitlab:user/repository-name

# Use a custom template repository from Bitbucket
npm create genuary -- --git bitbucket:user/repository-name
```


## Options

### `folder` (optional)
The target folder name for the project.
- Default: `genuary-<year>`
- Examples: `my-genuary`, `genuary-2025`, `art-challenge`

### `--year` (optional)
Genuary year to use for prompts.
- Default: Current year (2025)
- Fetches from: `https://genuary.art/<year>/prompts.json`
- Examples: `--year 2024`, `--year 2025`

### `--p5-version` (optional)
p5.js version to use in all sketches.
- Default: `latest`
- Passed to: `npm create p5js@<version>`
- Examples: `--p5-version 1.11.1`, `--p5-version latest`

### `--git` (optional)
Clone a custom template repository (via `degit`) instead of running `create-p5js`.
- Examples: `--git user/genuary-template`, `--git user/genuary-template#branch`
- When provided, any options meant for `create-p5js` (like `--p5-version`) are ignored and a warning will be shown.

## Generated Project Structure

```
genuary-2025/
├── sketches/
│   ├── 01_particles/           # p5.js sketch
│   ├── 02_no_palettes/         # p5.js sketch
│   ├── 03_droste_effect/       # p5.js sketch
│   └── ...                     # (31 total sketches)
├── index.html                  # Gallery view of all sketches
├── config.json                 # Project configuration (title, artist name, etc.)
├── README.md                   # Project documentation with prompt list
├── package.json                # Basic package manifest (includes server script)
└── .gitignore                  # Standard ignores
```

## Interactive Gallery

The generated project includes an `index.html` file that serves as an interactive gallery to navigate and showcase all daily sketches. Each sketch is linked with its corresponding Genuary prompt for easy reference.

### Configuration

The generated folder includes a `config.json` file in the project root. Edit this file to set your name, override the gallery title, or tweak other presentation settings without touching `index.html`. Browsers block loading JSON when a page is opened straight from the filesystem, so make sure to start a local server (e.g. `npm run serve`) to see your configuration changes in the gallery.

## Requirements

- Node.js 18 or higher (for native fetch support)
- Internet connection (for fetching prompts and running create-p5js)

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Refactor scaffold to use external gallery template
Replaces in-repo template files with a GitHub-cloned gallery template, removing local template rendering for index.html, README, config, and package.json. Introduces a new templateRenderer.js for prompt and config rendering. Updates scaffold logic to generate prompts.json and remove example sketches after cloning. Adjusts tests to match the new workflow and removes tests for deleted template functions.

README.md, after:

# create-genuary

A standalone npm package that scaffolds a complete Genuary folder with all daily prompts as individual folders with starter code, ready to use!

The project uses [create-p5js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/create-p5js) under the hood to generate each daily sketch. 

Alternatively, you can provide a custom template repository to use your own starter code for each sketch.

It also generates an interactive gallery to showcase all your sketches with the corresponding prompts.

## About Genuary

Genuary is a month-long creative coding challenge that happens every January since 2021. Each day has a unique prompt to inspire generative art and creative coding experiments.

Learn more at [genuary.art](https://genuary.art)

## Quick Start

```bash
npm create genuary
```

This will create a `genuary-2025/` folder with all 31 daily p5.js sketches pre-generated based on the official Genuary prompts.


## Usage

```bash
npm create genuary [folder] [options]
```

### Examples

```bash
# Create genuary-2025/ with latest p5.js
npm create genuary

# Create my-genuary/ folder
npm create genuary my-genuary

# Create genuary-2024/ with 2024 prompts
npm create genuary -- --year 2024

# Custom name, 2024 prompts
npm create genuary my-2024 -- --year 2024

# Use specific p5.js version
npm create genuary -- --p5-version 1.11.1

# Use a custom template repository from GitHub
npm create genuary -- --git user/repository-name

# Use a custom template repository from GitLab
npm create genuary -- --git gitlab:user/repository-name

# Use a custom template repository from Bitbucket
npm create genuary -- --git bitbucket:user/repository-name
```


## Options

### `folder` (optional)
The target folder name for the project.
- Default: `genuary-<year>`
- Examples: `my-genuary`, `genuary-2025`, `art-challenge`

### `--year` (optional)
Genuary year to use for prompts.
- Default: Current year (2025)
- Fetches from: `https://genuary.art/<year>/prompts.json`
- Examples: `--year 2024`, `--year 2025`

### `--p5-version` (optional)
p5.js version to use in all sketches.
- Default: `latest`
- Passed to: `npm create p5js@<version>`
- Examples: `--p5-version 1.11.1`, `--p5-version latest`

### `--git` (optional)
Clone a custom template repository (via `degit`) instead of running `create-p5js`.
- Examples: `--git user/genuary-template`, `--git user/genuary-template#branch`
- When provided, any options meant for `create-p5js` (like `--p5-version`) are ignored and a warning will be shown.

## Generated Project Structure

```
genuary-2025/
├── sketches/
│   ├── 01_particles/           # p5.js sketch
│   ├── 02_no_palettes/         # p5.js sketch
│   ├── 03_droste_effect/       # p5.js sketch
│   └── ...                     # (31 total sketches)
├── index.html                  # Gallery view of all sketches
├── config.json                 # Project configuration (title, artist name, etc.)
├── prompts.json                # Cached prompts used by the gallery
├── README.md                   # Project documentation with prompt list
├── package.json                # Basic package manifest (includes server script)
└── .gitignore                  # Standard ignores
```

## Interactive Gallery

The generated project includes an `index.html` file that serves as an interactive gallery to navigate and showcase all daily sketches. Each sketch is linked with its corresponding Genuary prompt for easy reference.

### Configuration

The generated folder includes a `config.json` file in the project root. Edit this file to set your name, override the gallery title, or tweak other presentation settings without touching `index.html`. The gallery also ships with a `prompts.json` file so the HTML bundle stays light and can be updated independently of the UI. Browsers block loading JSON when a page is opened straight from the filesystem, so make sure to start a local server (e.g. `npm run serve`) to see changes coming from `config.json` or `prompts.json`.

## Requirements

- Node.js 18 or higher (for native fetch support)
- Internet connection (for fetching prompts and running create-p5js)

## License

MIT
